# **M3 - A Markov Distinction**
Mission 3: A Markov Distinction for Bowdoin CSCI 3725: Computational Creativity.  
Task: "use a Markov chain (or Markov model) to create a piece of visual art that you would find meaningful"

## Author
Ahmed Hameed  

### Version Date:
April 5th, 2021  

## **Program Description:**
A program that reads in input text, populates a frequency table of previous character occurrences in input text (only counting the previous character for each current character), creates new text based off of the previous occurrence counts, and then finally, generate unique visual output for each character in the newly produced text using a mapping of common characters to visual elements. Majority of the program functionality is handled by
the "MarkovTextArt" class which uses the Turtle library to create the drawings.

## **Program Instructions:**
### How to run the program:
1. Go to the main() functions (line 380)
2. Set the parameters of the visual art (lines 386-393)
3. Set the input filename that will be used in the Markov chain. Format: "text_input/[filename.txt]" (line 399)
4. Press run!
5. A turtle drawing window should now popup on your screen with the visualization complete. If you forget which text file is currently being visualized then just check the terminal output of your IDE. 
Note: If you want to save the visual output then you should take a screenshot of this screen as there is no effective way to save Turtle drawings as images (as far as I know).
Note: The output produced by the Markov chain based on the text input can be found in the "text_output" directory. This Markov text can be compared to the visual output or the initial text input. Please note that the 1-order
Markov chain uses characters rather than words so the text that it produces isn't readable or coherent.  

## **Personal Discussion**
I find this system personally meaningful because I spent quite a lot of time on it and I feel very proud of the output. Before starting this project, I did a fair bit of research on Markov Chains and how they were being used. One of the most common uses that I found was for generating unique text. This knowledge was a bit of a blessing and a curse for me; I was glad because text generation sounded like a really cool use of Markov chains but the whole point of this assignment was to create unique **visual** output so I had to find some way to merge the two ideas. After considering my dilemma for a few days, I came up with this idea to create a mapping of visual output to each character input. Letters would have unique colors and they would be represented using circles. I then tried to find appropriate visual output for punctuations and for numbers as well. The most significant aspect of this system for me is that the output it produces represents the syntax and structure of the initial text input pretty well. For example, Shakespeare's Macbeth (along with many of his plays) has a very rigid structure: it was written in iambic pentameter and it has very clear and consistent line breaks throughout the entire text. The Markov Art produced by the Macbeth text input actually resembles that same language structure, it has consistent line breaks and similar text groupings, etc. I also love how the visual output looks, it's aesthetically pleasing which is really important to me. I feel that what my system generates could be viewed as art and others might find it meaningful as well.  
This project was genuinely challenging for me as a Computer Scientist and as a programmer, as I've never worked with Markov Chains before and I've never had to generate art with my code before. The assignment was very open-ended as well which only added to the challenge: not only was I exploring an area outside of my expertise, I had to explore this unfamiliar ground with minimal guidance or direction. But even though I felt way out of my comfort zone, I persisted. I took the time to research Markov chains: common uses, how people were using them for art generation, etc. I took the time to brainstorm project ideas and synthesize something new based on my research and what I knew. Even though it was difficult, I believe that this was an important challenge for me because I don't have a lot of experience with open-ended projects and it's really important for me to build that skill. Throughout the course of this project, I've learned that open-ended projects require a lot of discipline, critical thinking, and decision-making abilities. These are all valuable skills in the workplace and in life.  
Looking back on this experience, there are a few things that I will do differently in my future independent and open-ended assignments and a few things that I plan to keep the same. I will give myself even more time to research and study the problem or project I'm working on. That means starting the research phase as soon as possible so that I have extra time to brainstorm and synthesize ideas. After synthesizing an idea for the project, I will give myself ample time to outline the project and my implementation. After creating a comprehensive outline of my implementation, I will go through that outline and assign priority values to the features that must be completed first and begin working on those feature right away. Additionally, after every work session, I will revisit and update my outline as I complete certain features or if my ideas change. Furthermore, I will try to change the structure of how I work as much as possible so that I work on the project in small frequent increments rather than semi-frequent large increments. I believe if I take the advice that I've written out here, then I will have a much easier time undertaking these large independent and open-ended projects.  
## **Is it *Creative*???**
The short answer is: kind of... It all really depends on how we define creativity in relation to this system. If we definite creativity based on the simple metrics of value and novelty, then yes! My system is personally creative at least as the output it generates is new and it is meaningful (to me and some of my family and friends that I've showed this program to). If we were to take a more nuanced definition of creativity, we would consider what types of creativity this system exhibits. It definitely has combinatorial creativity in that the output is generated from a specific input and that the visuals produced are similiar to the initial input. The input text is passed to the first-order Markov chain which memorizes the previous character occurrences, that frequency map of characters is then used to generate new text which is then visualized. The 'creativity' is really only occurring at the Markov chain when the new 'Markov text' is generated. So in a way, this system's creativity is limited by the Markov chain and its structure. The Markov chain at its core is a simple concept: 'use past history of states to predict future states'. That's it! The Markov chain doesn't alter the states at all, it doesn't add or remove states, it simply tracks how the states occurred in the past and tries its best to predict future states. So even if I were to put more effort into creating a more complex Markov chain that tracks entire word occurrences rather then previous characters, I would still be limited by the structure of the Markov chain itself.  
If I wanted my system to exhibit exploratory or transformational types of creativity then I would need to either change the structure I use for generating new text (something other than a Markov chain) or include those kinds of creativity elsewhere in the program. For example, what if the output text and the character occurrences changed how the visuals were created? What if letters that had lower character counts appeared more transparent in relation to other letters in the visual? What about the inverse? What if the letter frequencies changed the actual colors of the letters? What if every word had its own unique shape and visual in the output? I could also think about the mapping of characters to visual output, currently the mapping only considers one character at a time but what if I changed so that it considers entire words at once or sentences even? Can I integrate more rules about English and language into my system so that it is smarter? These are all questions that I would ask myself and this system if I wanted to move forward in the creative direction.

## **Sources:**
### text_input:
1. arctic_monkeys_AM_album_song_lyrics.txt - AM album by Arctic Monekys (full song lyrics). These lyrics were compiled from https://www.lyricsondemand.com/a/arcticmonkeyslyrics/amalbumlyrics.html
2. cat_walking_on_keyboard.txt - Generated by striking random keys on my keyboard
3. jane_eyre_bronte_first_11_chapters.txt - The first 11 chapter of Jane Eyre by Charlotte Bronte. The book text was gathered from https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1260/1260-0.txt
4. macbeth_shakespeare.txt - Macbeth by Shakespeare. The play transcript was gathered from https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1533/1533-0.txt
5. random_text_ABC.txt - Gathered from a character generator online (https://www.wordgen.eu/#!en/generator/from-letters)  
### Mapping of Colors to Alphabet Letters:
CHAR_TO_COLORS - A dictionary constant that maps alphabet letters (lowercase and uppercase) to RGB color values. This distribution of color values was uses the second RGB color table from https://www.rapidtables.com/web/color/RGB_Color.html. Note: the way the letters are mapped to the color table, letters that are closer together in the alphabet will have similar color values than those that are far apart in the alphabet (ex. letters a, b, and c all have similar reddish colors). 